this video was brought to you by
curiosity stream I really hope they feel
like they got their money's worth on
this one because the saxophone solo that
we're gonna be talking about today is
really bad like if somebody ran a mile
and was forced to breathe out of a
saxophone it sounded like a goose having
sex it's from an alternative take of the
1956 song the Jones girl by the five
satins and Twitter seems to have this
recurring fascination with it to be a
hundred percent honest I also have a
recurring fascination with it it's
really truly atrocious it's not very
good at all it's been called the worst
jazz solo of all time but what do we
really mean by that and we quantify that
in any kind of meaningful way can we use
some kind of music theory analysis to
explain its badness well some people
have tried one article called it atonal
which just isn't true actually a
tonality is the absence of tonal Center
and in the recording the saxophonist
keeps playing the same note over and
over and over again
it has a tonal Center a tonal center
anyway the same article claims that the
solo is a pale imitation of bebop
saxophonist Charlie Parker which just is
not true in fact the real history behind
the solo and its musical lineage is a
lot more interesting and believe it or
not more nuanced we are here today to
try and figure out what makes a solo bad
we need to understand what it is we are
listening to before we pass judgment
it's easy to make fun of something but
hard to come to grips with why exactly
we do that solo means I only have to
play one note right got the notes it's
playing if the hit season not play you
mean literally all other notes just have
Jerry do the solo carry only knows one
note be fine so grab a cup of coffee
get comfortable we're here today
analyzing the worst jazz solo of all
time I got a laugh at myself right now
I wrote that thing song called a Jones
girl and I always thought it was the big
time a big time hit record and it took
sixty three years for recognises this
style of soloing aggressively playing
the same pitch over and over and over
again on a 12 bar blues can actually be
traced back to a single recording 1942
is flying home by Lionel Hamptons band
featuring then 19 year old saxophonist
Illinois Jacquet the king of the vibra
harp the master of the drums with his
all-time big record of ride home is Lila
flying home was an enormous commercial
success for Lionel Hampton Spann and
ushered in an entirely new style of
saxophone playing which audiences went
crazy for it was aggressive is exciting
it was primal jackets frenzied style
developed as a stark contrast to the
fluid and dense and cerebral melodic
improvisations of bee boppers like save
Charlie Parker the school of Charlie
Parker's playing was sophisticated and
urbane a school of Illinois Jacquet
splaying was much more in-your-face this
style would culminate in a series of
concerts known as jazz at the
Philharmonic these were called a
gladiatorial arena a jazz critic Norman
Krantz because they would pick different
saxophones together and we could only
really be described as jazz battles the
ammunition that was volley back and
forth in these jazz battles were things
like multiphonics and altissimo squeals
and incessant OneNote passages yeah man
jazz battles we should have more jazz
battles these days why why is there no
jazz battles come on but like with any
war the soldiers in these jazz battles
were the ones to pay the price the
incessant screeching night after night
after night on tour was extraordinarily
physically demanding and Jacquet had to
quit Hamptons band after just a couple
of years on tour sometimes you have to
quit to save your life I looked in the
mirror and said you're dying and Hampton
is getting rich physical demands and
saxophone battle fatigue aside the
techniques that jazz musicians like
Illinois Jacquet developed in the 1940s
would go on to deeply influence the R&B
musicians of the 1950s just check out
red prysock playing on the tune hand
clapping
[Music]
Zillow means I only have to play one
note right just up Jerry do the solo
Jerry only knows one note I'll be fine
that's just one note play it over and
over again that was an important part of
the style in the 1950s and there was
probably nobody who better embodied the
style of the R&B saxophone Whaler than
big Jay McNeely
yes that is a glow-in-the-dark saxophone
and I want one the avant-garde jazz
saxophonist Ornette Coleman would say of
McNeely I saw this big looking guy all
dressed up in this fine looking zoot
suit and he was honking one note over
and over and over with one of the
biggest saxophone sounds I had ever
heard Ornette Coleman and the rest of
the free jazz avant-garde borrowed very
heavily from R&B saxophone technique
just listened to the intense altissimo
squeal of big Jay McNeely on the tune
real crazy cool
it's the same altissimo hi-c over and
over again the energy is just off the
charts but it is kind of uncomfortable
it might be a little bit hard to listen
to the note is rather out of tune nobody
on Twitter seems to be making fun of big
Jay McNeely in fact the exact opposite
was the case whenever he played
reactions among his audiences were
frenzied to say the least reactions like
this one where a woman seems to be
head-butting his saxophone the style and
the technique of big Jay McNeely and the
rawness that came with it is cut from
the same cloth as Illinois Jacquet it
was a very popular sound and it was
bound to be imitated solo means I only
have to play one note right my man Vinny
they played the sax he only had a couple
of minutes to rehearse with us so it
wasn't like a thing of going over two
songs that we did that particular
session so maybe 10 minutes we got
together and Vinny didn't know what the
heck to do the Jones girl solo can be
attributed to Vinny Mazetti a local
Connecticut saxophone player that helped
the five satins arrange a recording
session in the basement of st.
Bernadette Church in New Haven
Connecticut now there are other 12 bar
blues solos that only use one notes that
are rather unarmed to say the least
like for example Brian ferries let's
stick together
[Music]
sorry to all the brine ferry fans out
there but Vinny Mazetti is solo on the
alternate take of the Jones girl is
especially unfortunate the solo is
loosely built from a repetitive to bar
pattern that centers around the tonic
the one it doesn't repeat the same way
every time though the first time that we
hear the pattern the second note is on
the end of two and there's a little bit
of a fall but the second time we hear
the pattern that second note is actually
on the downbeat of three the third time
we hear it Mazetti adds a pickup note
but he doesn't articulate it very
clearly he doesn't tongue it so the
notes become slurred together in a way
that's rather indistinct this slurring
effect continues as the solo picks up
more and more variations pile on so even
though it's very repetitive the
repetitions don't feel particularly
intentional all of the variations feel
like Mazetti doesn't have full control
of his instrument and whatever's coming
out is just whatever he can play at the
time so even though repetition does
serve to reinforce musical ideas that
doesn't work when the repetition does
not feel intentional then there's of
course the gigantic elephants in the
room the thing that people pick up on
the most when they first listen to the
solo and that is machetes intonation it
is shall we say alternative the Jones
girl itself is in the key of D flat but
by the time we get to the solo Mazetti
is playing so sharp that it sounds like
he's actually playing a d natural over
and over again but not quite d natural
it's almost there
we want to be very specific it's
d-natural if a was tuned to 432 so who
knows maybe Mazetti is just trying to
get all the chakras in the band aligned
or maybe he's trying to ascend to a
higher spiritual plane by playing that D
at a 432 who knows you can get away with
this alternative intonation because
there is no chordal accompaniment on the
Jones girl there is no pianist and there
is no guitarist the five satins are a do
up group and all the harmonic
information is coming from the vocal
harmonies so by the time to hear the sax
solo there are no chords as the solo
progresses and the repetitions become
more and more frantic Mazetti starts
rushing out in front of the rest of the
band leading to a fairly awkward
rhythmic moment where Mazetti realizes
that he is no longer in sync with the
bass and the drums
it's at this moment where you can really
hear the panic and Mazetti saxophone
playing he plays a couple of split tones
which is that growling saxophone camera
that's caused by over blowing on the
reed split tones can sound really nice
in certain contexts but only when they
feel intentional and it certainly
doesn't feel intentional here when
Mazetti gets back on track and stops
playing split tones and gets back
together with the bassist in the drummer
he abandons his first rhythmic pattern
and starts a new one almost as if he
forgot the one that he started with the
new one that he starts was featured
prominently in Bill Haley in the commets
rock around the clock one two three or
many light swing tins from this era that
were 12 bar blues that featured one note
to t-sections fun word you'd have a
section of horn players playing the same
rhythm but with one note staying the
same on top for example woody Furman's
would chocolate ball
[Music]
these two songs were very popular in
their day and they were working with a
ridiculously simple idea you take the
root note of whatever key you're working
in and then you just repeat it over and
over again pop songs these days am i
right is Etta and the five satins were a
product of their time in the 1950s and
likely were well aware of the
established tropes and the popular music
of that time they had a sense right or
wrong of what might be popular it's the
same note over and over and over again I
thought I was gonna hit fart so what
happened in his book the listening book
waa matthew has this exercise pick a
single note on your instrument or your
voice preferably mid-range at first make
a short piece using only that note
perhaps this one note limit seems too
austere or maybe too silly but when you
take it to heart you will find an
astonishing array of possible sounds I
could for example play this G short or I
could play it long I could play it loud
I could play it medium I could play it
soft I could play it as a harmonic good
pop it I could slap it I could play it
here or could play it here for a
slightly different sound I could go back
and forth between those two sounds which
is something called a Tambor old trill
saxophonist I love that idea
I could put horizontal vibrato on the
note I put vertical vibrato on the note
I put a lot of vertical vibrato on the
note I could bend up to the note I could
bend down to though play the note
towards the bridge towards the neck I
play with my fingernail I could palm
mute it with my right hand could meet it
with my left hand but a bit here and a
bit here of course I can string these
ideas together with different rhythms
and through rhythm we can make musical
statements that might be meaningful like
for example I could do a
call-and-response between two different
Tambor's I could play poly rhythms I
could play drum rudiments like
paradiddles I can let a harmonic ring
while they play different rhythms on
another string
[Music]
or you focus on this limitation the more
you realize there's actually a lot to
explore the Coquille come one note
usually is in reference to something
one-dimensional as in I found the
presentation very one note and
uninspired
but for practitioners of one note solos
one note can be anything but I'm
enormous ly inspired by Evelyn Glenys
solo snare drum performances
they're dynamic they're exciting and
they're really mostly emotionally moving
pieces of music but because there's just
one drum you can kind of think of it as
a form of one note solo you have this
one sound source so you can't rely on
things like scales and melody and
harmony to create musical interest you
have to really dig deeper and explore
things like dynamic tone color and of
course rhythm these things are
fundamental in expressing musical ideas
and unfortunately are often neglected by
musicians as well as people whose
musical opinions should not matter there
are three elements to music there is
harmony
there's there is melody and there's
rhythm oh isn't that cute Ben's opinions
on music are just so adorable sometimes
there are three elements to muse now
there are modern composers who have
explored these elements like tone color
and rhythm through OneNote music like
for example the first movement of
Hungarian composer Georgi Ligon ease
musica Richard kata which just kind of
chills on the note a
the musical interest here comes from the
rhythmic displacements as well as the
shifting octaves sometimes you're
hearing that a low sometimes you're
hearing it high pretty cool rhythm is
the primary motivator here there is no
melody there is no harmony just sorry
Ligety ben shapiro does not consider you
a musician that there's not a lot of
melody and there's not a lot of harmony
to reach your cut that only fulfills one
of these the rhythm section gotta pack
it in man you're not a composer facts
don't care about your feelings there are
three elements to music you can also
have one note music that's not
particularly rhythmic in its conception
like for example the seventh movement -
Eliot Carter's eight heads and a fantasy
it just kind of chills on the note G the
musical interest here comes purely from
dynamics and the shifting tone colors as
different instruments come in and out
it's very interesting and it's also very
interesting to compare how Western
classical composers use the idea of one
note music with say how big J McNeely
did there are fundamentally different
philosophical and aesthetic goals at
play here which lead to radically
different artistic statements and
radically different emotional states in
the audience if I was going to do a
hackneyed analogy which let's be fair is
one of my favorite things to do I would
say that the woodwind quintet music of
Elliott Carter is like a Mark Rothko
painting severe austere minimalist and
rather for building
no growth whereas the music of big
J McNeely is more like a strobe light
something that just punches you in the
face over and over and over again with
one note there's a diversity of purpose
and musical effect here Mark Rothko and
strobe lights elliott carter and big Jay
McNeely but they both used the same
musical technique so it's not really
that useful to critique or analyze a
piece of music solely based on
cataloguing the techniques used that's
not really enough to give you a full
understanding of what's going on music
theory without some kind of cultural or
historical context just won't cut it
yeah we can say that the alternative
take of the Jones girl solo uses one
note we have to dig a little bit deeper
on what that one note means in context
in this case it attempted to use a
stylistic language that is altogether
brash and arrogant and it wasn't Vinnie
Mazetti wasn't he wasn't up to the
challenge of speaking this language of
arrogance with any degree of confidence
and so his solo comes across sounding
weak and impotent big Jay McNeely might
sometimes sound like a screaming goat
but damn it he is committed and because
he is committed people respond that
means I just have to play one note right
[Music]
have to play one
ooh
[Music]
playing the same note over and over
again creates musical attention even if
that note is the tonic pitch which is
traditionally a place of rest what
you're doing is you're making the
audience ask questions like when is the
note going to change how will it change
when it changes is the no point to
change what's going to happen in the
case of the Jones girl solo none of
those questions are answered Mazetti
just stops playing two bars before the
solo ends and we're left with a rather
awkward pause now there are other
musical traditions that use one note
that have this arrogant brashness to
them like for example the tradition of
the one note rock guitar solo Pete
Townsend captures this kind of energy on
the hoos I can see for miles
Neil Young is especially well known for
this kind of solo and you can hear it
honest tune Cinnamon Girl in both the
rock and R&B traditions of OneNote solos
the one that was that I was attempting
to emulate there's almost a statement
being made it's almost as if saying
cueing Vey Hugh Charlie Parker what you
need a million notes to do I can do with
just one note and I can do it better
we cringe at Mazetti x' attempt because
he can't do it better which just goes to
show that it requires a musician of
incredible finesse and confidence to be
able to play one note it's not easy so
normally I try not to make fun of people
if they're doing things in good faith
but yeah it's funny Miz that a solo is
really bad and it's comically bad in
fact comparing it to other musicians who
did the same idea but better just
underscores that fact no it probably
isn't the worst to jazz solo of all time
that honor would probably go to some
boat that I played in freshman ensemble
when I was in music school but it's not
good it's really bad it's kind of funny
in MS Etta's defense though there are a
couple of things that I do want to
mention the first one and probably the
most obvious is that this was an
alternative take of the Jones girl and
it's probably a good reason why it was
the alternative take it wasn't very good
on the main version of the song Mazetti
also takes a solo that has rather
alternative intonation but it's not
nearly as bad
[Music]
but another interesting wrinkle to this
story is the fact that the five satins
were not a no-name band they saw
commercial success in their day and they
continued to see commercial as well as
critical success today in popular
culture just not on Twitter and the
reason for their commercial success
comes from the exact same recording
session that they recorded the Jones
girl and its alternative take the so
called
worst jazz solo of all time we came a
long way as far as as far as the song
goes there was just look I guess and I
like to say that this was recorded it in
a church basement it was it was blessed
in the very same recording session in
which the Jones girl was recorded in the
basement of Saint Bernadette Church the
five satins also recorded their smash
hit in the still of the night a doo-wop
song that went on to sell over a million
copies same band now what's interesting
is that it was recently featured in a
Martin Scorsese film the Irishman and it
also has a saxophone solo from Vinnie
Mazetti that has intonation that shall
we say is less than perfect but people
on the internet have not made fun of in
the still of the night the same way that
they did of the Jones girl alternative
take in the context of the Irishman the
sound of the saxophone comes across as
well a little rough around the edges but
maybe quaint or nostalgic or wistful
that should tell you is that the way we
interpret music the way that we hear
music is often very very dependent on
context on Twitter we might mock it on
the big screen we might consider it art
I mean don't get me wrong the saxophone
solo on the Jones girl is not very good
but the reason why it's not very good
has little to do with the fact that it's
one note after all musicians have been
working within that limitation for a
long time and have been able to create
pretty amazing pieces of music and it
doesn't really have anything to do with
the fact that it's kind of out of tune
or it's not very rhythmically concise
what it really boils down to at least in
my opinion
is the fact that Vinnie Mazetti is not
really saying a whole lot big J McNeely
an Illinois Jacquet simply say more with
one note solos that's a hard thing to
quantify but it's also a hard thing to
deny like how would we even begin to
quantify that right if we started to
look through all the sheet music
transcriptions of the solos that we
listened to today and we tried to find
some kind of common thread which says
this solo is good and this is bad
we'd come up entirely empty yeah the
Jones girl solo only has one note but so
does flying home and that was an
international sensation
yeah the Jones girl solo was
rhythmically awkward and out of tune but
so was real crazy cool by big Jay
McNeely who inspired an entire
generation of saxophonist yeah the Jones
girls solo had inconsistent variations
but so did hand clapping by red prysock
and that tune just sounds awesome it's
easy to reduce a critique to a soundbite
solo bad because out of tune solo bad
because one note but as in anything in
life worth doing music is a little bit
more nuanced than that there are some
things that we can explore and they
so-called worst jazz solo of all time
that might be worth our while like for
example the idea of a one note solo
there are contemporary one note soloists
that we could turn to here like for
example Leo P very much is continuing in
the arrogant swagger tradition of
Illinois Jacquet in the big J McNeely
then there are others who take the more
conceptual and textual approach of
modern classical music like for example
creative youtubers like Rob Scallon but
I would be remiss in this video if I did
not at least mention the most famous
piece of OneNote music there is I'm
talking of course about Antonio Carlos
Jobim 'he's OneNote Samba which as you
can tell contains quite a bit more than
just one note but hey that's besides the
point
the main musical idea of the one note
Samba is to take one note place it in
the melody and then move chords around
underneath it the shifting harmonic
colors underneath that one note give
that note new meanings every time you
hear it it's a remarkably effective idea
harmony changes musical context what if
we took my Zetas solo and changed the
harmony underneath how would that change
the story being told
curious
[Music]
you might notice that I used a fair
number of musical recordings in this
video as examples which is something
that unfortunately I haven't been able
to do that frequently because of the
stresses of battling major music labels
over content ID and issues of Faerie use
and monetization that's been a huge drag
but thankfully I can do it for this
video thanks to today's sponsor
curiosity stream who has partnered with
nebula a creator own streaming service
that I recently joined specifically so I
could make this kind of video free of
that kind of worry nebula features many
of YouTube's favorite educational
channels like Wendover productions
twelve-tone legal eagle real engineering
polyphonic and many many more it's a
great place to watch and discover really
quality content ad free and support your
favorite creators it's also a home to
bonus content like for example instead
of this ad read in the video that I
uploaded to nebula
you'll be giving a harmonic analysis of
the music that you're listening to right
now yay
so what does this have to do with
curiosity stream well as the go-to
source for the best documentaries on the
internet like the very excellent
documentary the jazz loft
according to W Eugene Smith all about
jazz musicians in mid-century Manhattan
curiosity stream has a vested interest
in educational content and educational
creators
[Music]
you can click on the link in the
description or go to curiosity stream
comm / Adam Ely to get started with your
free trial
[Music]
by clicking the link you're directly
helping out this channel as well as many
other channels on YouTube and to be
clear this nebula subscription is not a
trial as free as long as you're a
curiosity stream number
[Applause]
[Music]
a great solo Zack zinger everybody he
did play more than one note but we'll
forgive them if you have any examples of
one note solos that you'd like for me to
check out please leave them in the
comment section I think that window
solos are an awesome idea I think
there's a lot of music that can be made
with just one note so let me know and
remember everybody it's not the notes
that you play it's what you do with the
notes that you do that's not it better
in my head
[Music]